[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Joe Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> We are
>> eating pizza. We are recording this July
8th and we've done backto backtoback
episodes and we haven't had time for
lunch. So I too am going to eat this
bite of pizza.
>> It's really good.
>> We're eating really good pizza in the
studio. It's really good. People are
probably wondering what's going on why
we're All right. One second. I'm going
to swallow my food.
But I swear we're not going to be
sounding like we're eating pizza the
entire time. Maybe we'll
>> speak for yourself.
>> Okay, Tracy. A few months ago, I noticed
a new pizza restaurant had opened up in
the East Village. And I thought to
myself, what kind of person looks at the
East Village and thinks, you know what,
this neighborhood needs a new pizza
restaurant? And I've always been sort of
I've been vexed by that question for a
long time.
>> Wait, it's a saturated market. But on
the other hand, isn't like pizza in New
York a slam dunk? Everyone loves pizza.
We come here for pizza, don't we?
>> I guess that's true. It just seems like
there there is a lot of pizza in the
East Village and opening up a new pizza
place. It's very capital intensive.
There's the stoves, there's the risk,
there's the brand, there's all these
things. I would not have the guts to
open up a new pizza restaurant. I would
just assume that the market I would just
take the it's saturated view. Maybe you
have the more maybe you would be the
more o optimistic and entrepreneurial.
You can't go wrong with pizza.
>> Yeah, you can't. It's New York City. I
guess I could see it both ways. But I
did find it striking and it is of course
one of the most ubiquitous businesses
that you see at the ground level in New
York City, great pizza city. And I don't
really know anything about the business
of pizza.
>> No. And we just spoke to a bakery
business that is getting into the pizza
business. So this is a really nice segue
and natural evolution of the
conversation.
>> Yeah. I want to know how you make money
selling a slice of pizza in New York
City. I'm really excited. We actually
have three perfect guests in the studio
today. They brought us pizza. So, there
is a disclosure that we have to get out
of the way, which we are eating the
pizza that they brought us. So, if you
listen to this episode and you think
like we've been like, you know,
painfully bought off or whatever, then
this then that's why it's because I had
some pizza. But, it's also an
interesting one because a this pizzeria
is right by Bloomberg. So, that's
another excuse for why we're doing this
one. But also, two of the owners of the
restaurant also own a um a deli or cafe
near Bloomberg that I go to for lunch
all the time. The Oxford Cafe. I don't
really like eating pizza for lunch if
I'm being honest. It's a little heavy,
but I love a chopped salad. And the
Oxford Cafe, which is very close to
Bloomberg, in my opinion, is the best
chopped salad operation in the entire
city or that I've been to. No, for real.
And so, I'm sort of curious about that,
how you differentiate there. So, I just
want to learn about like lunchtime food,
including pizza.
>> Let's do it. our three guests. I'm going
to introduce them. We're going to be
speaking with James Shields. He is a
restaurant tour here in New York City.
He uh involved in multiple things, but
he is a co-founder of Zeno's Pizza,
which is on 52nd Street between Second
and Third. And then we're also going to
be speaking with the other Zeno's
co-founders, Alex Xenopoulos, who also
owns the Oxford Cafe, and his brother
Evansopoulos. So, they're all involved
in multiple things, and uh Evan and Alex
and Oxford and James and pizza, etc. And
we are going to learn how to make money
selling a slice of pizza. So, I'll throw
this out, James, or anyone else, but
James, I'll start with you.
Why did you think there was capacity or
a reason when you looked at this uh
location at 52nd Street between Second
and Third to think, you know what, this
area could use another piece of place?
>> Sure. I mean, for us, it was clear
during the pandemic, there was a great
clearing event where a bunch of, you
know, established places went out of
business. and Midtown specifically, that
area, 52nd Street and that corridor, it
was a bit of a pizza desert and it's not
the same as like the East Village or the
West Village or Time Square or something
like that where if you open up shop,
you're going to immediately be in a
knife fight. So, this was a a green
space for us. And, you know, me and Alex
and Evan kind of had this chance meeting
through a friend of ours. you know, they
were looking for someone to to do
something with their pizzeria, which
they had established at the mill. And we
got to talking and we knew a space that
was right across the street, and it just
immediately clicked. And we're like, we
have a partnership here. We're going to
make an honest go of it. Let's throw
some money in here and make this happen.
>> Okay. My first question is pineapple on
pizza. Yay or nay?
>> Man. Yeah. Okay. So, I'm going to talk
since I've been making pizza and I'm I'm
>> This is the important stuff.
>> Exactly. So, this is all near and dear
to my heart. So, I'm okay with pineapple
and ham on pizza. It depends on the
type.
>> If you try to put it on Neapolitan,
that's sacrilegious. And then you're
going to get like you're going to get
your uh your pizza making card revoked.
But if you do it on like a New York
slice or maybe in a Sicilian, then you
know what? You're you're in okay
territory and we can we can give you a
pass. I don't know how you guys are
going to react to this, but at my local
pizza place in Connecticut, they do a
Hawaiian with cherries on top of it. So
good.
>> So, I've done it with soapada and
ricotta. And if you drizzle some of that
like mariscino cherry juice on it, it
just ties the whole thing together cuz
you get that salty, that sweet, and you
get a little bit of that like heat, too.
>> I do find that question kind of
interesting because
>> this is Alex, by the way.
>> No, sorry. This is Alex. Because you
know Italians do eat pudo with melon,
right? So that it does have a similar
profile to ham and pineapple. So you
know I've always found it like an
interesting kind of
>> I don't know why it became so
controversial. It seems like a natural
match.
>> No, there's a meme of like some Italian
guy looking at a pineapple on pizza like
get away that nonsense and then he sees
the pushut on melon. It's like oh
amazing delicacy.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. I personally I'm a traditionalist.
that just when we were like partnering
up on this, our aim was how do we make
the best plain slice as well, right? And
that's I feel one of the most important
characteristics in New York. So, I've
never been a big pineapple um pizza
person, but you know, how do you get to
that best plain slice is kind of one
that was one of our big motivating
factors when we met up and you know,
trying to figure that out.
>> And that was Evan speaking, by the way.
All right, let's talk about that. So,
you guys uh Evan and Alex, you have
background in other restaurants. I
mentioned the Oxford Cafe which I highly
recommend. When you thought about okay
you want to partner and get involved in
the pizza opportunity. We've established
that this area is a pizza desert. How do
you think about like the sort of where
in the market high-end to low-end etc is
optimal and what are the categories of
the market that exist?
>> You know it's it's a good question. And
you know one of the elements that like
James mentioned earlier we had a pizza
section in our place on 52nd lex the
mill and you know before the pandemic a
large component of that section's
business was catering. So when we were
looking at this specific location we
signed a lease before the omocrron
variant and obviously there were issues
kind of with people coming back to the
office afterwards and things like that.
So part of the when we were looking at
this location was the thinking was that
we would have a lot more catering higher
price point transactions that was kind
of sustained the business versus doing
uh solely kind of by the slice
operations because that is a lower
ticket price involves a lot of
transactions to really get the volume
and sales that you need to kind of you
know cover all the costs. I'm sure we'll
discuss kind of the elements of the
business. So I think what you've been
seeing the last couple of years with a
lot of costs across the board, you know,
for food and beverage, it's become so
much more difficult to operate.
Everything's become more expensive. You
relying on third party services, you
know, different digital applications
that all take a couple of points from
your business, right? So, you know,
you're seeing a transition in New York
in terms of pizza where people are
trying to go up the food chain to a
higher price point to be able to kind of
cover those expenses. So you're seeing a
lot of kind of traditional mom and pop
places close, dollar slice shops, even
really good ones that had, you know, a
lot of, you know, had a good reputation.
You're seeing a lot of those struggle as
well. So you're seeing a a big
transition, whereas I'd say, you know,
10 to 15 years ago, you know, you'd
almost never see a pizzeria close. I
mean, it was just really, really
unusual. Now you're seeing kind of a lot
of new entrance, a lot of people
exiting. So there's a churn that in the
business that just didn't exist. How
does pizza actually move up in terms of
pricing? Because I imagine, you know, I
love pizza, but it is in some ways a
humble product and there are limited
things you can do to it. So, if you're
trying to charge more money for pizza by
making it, I don't know, like luxury
pizza,
>> gold leaf, and caviar. Is that what
you're trying to say?
>> Does that work? What do you do?
>> No, there's a window, right? And the way
that Zenos is is kind of positioned
within the marketplace is we're premium
product, premium price. So, like we want
to be on the higher end and we also want
to use the best, freshest quality
ingredients that you're going to find in
our marketplace, right? Cuz we want to
stand behind what we eat. We want to
eat, you know, really good, healthy,
fresh food every day, right? And that
that even goes to like that facilitates
the process that we go through. So, we
ferment our dough for 48 hours, right?
Most sliced joints in in New York City
are like 24 hours. And why why is that
different? Right? It makes the product a
little more healthy because the yeast
are essentially digesting the gluten and
kind of softening the dough for your
stomach to process, right? So, it's it's
something that doesn't sit in your
stomach, you know, and you feel that
when you eat our slice, you know, you
don't leave the place being like, uh,
you know what I mean?
>> This is why I don't I didn't realize
this. This is why I don't really usually
eat pizza cuz I don't want to feel that
in the middle of the day, but I didn't
realize that this could be addressed by
going more pre.
>> Brother, let me put you on the spot. How
do you feel right now after eating that
slice? I I've eaten two slices since
we've started talking. I feel okay right
now.
>> All right.
>> Wow. This is really I learned something.
>> Yeah. Eye opening. Right. And this this
goes to the economics of like you need
additional storage in your walk-in. You
need to process this a couple days
beforehand. So that means if you get an
order, you know, 24 hours, you're
already 24 hours behind in the process,
right? So like the logistics of this is
is quite impressive to manage on a scale
that we do it at. What else makes a
difference in terms of ingredient costs
and whether it's cheese, whether it's
tomato sauce, like what is the
difference between your slice and a
dollar slice?
>> Yeah. So, I'd say cheese is the most
expensive cost center that we have more
than meat, more than uh any other thing,
right? But you've seen inflation across
the board and also like it ties into
tariffs and things like that. We have,
you know, Italian-based products that,
you know, like canned tomatoes and that
kind of thing that do get impacted, but
cheese by far is the biggest cost
center. One of the more random
experiences I have had in my life is
talking to a pizza salesman in I think
it was Tanzania of all places, like a
door-to-d dooror pizza oven salesman.
And one of the things I internalized
from that conversation was pizza ovens
are really, really tricky. it seems very
difficult to like get them exactly
right. So I'm curious how much equipment
costs factor into the business and how
careful you have to be about that sort
of initial capital investment.
>> Yeah, I can jump in on that. This is
Evan. So we opened the restaurant
actually three years ago this Sunday. So
three years ago. But
>> let's go.
>> We were looking at the equipment just as
an example. So our oven now it's the
pizza masters. Everyone's using it.
Everyone's going electric now, which is
definitely a big trend in the city's
obviously going against, you know, gas
powered grills, ovens, and things like
that. But we bought our oven 3 years ago
was $32,000. It is now, I think,
$45,000.
>> Wow.
>> Just just as an example of what kind of
>> I see one for $91,000.
>> Oh, that's that's the five deck. We're
at We're at a three deck, so we're a
little bit less than that, but yeah. So,
you're looking at that and then it's
just all the extra equipment. That's
where it gets daunting, you know, to
open up. And we're only a thousand
square foot restaurant. If you're doing
like a fine dining restaurant, you can
even imagine, you know, what what the
kitchen equipment's going to. And yeah,
so you're trying your best to, you know,
make a business plan, keep your costs in
order. But, you know, you're getting low
fridges. Uh our pizza shredder cost low
fridge lower to the ground, but you have
a counter on top of it. Underneath
there's just fridge storage.
>> Just as an example, our shredder costs
$5,000. So you can see how all these
little things you keep adding into the
business just keep adding and adding and
adding and you're trying to get the
restaurant open as fast as possible. We
had a hiccup during our construction is
we needed a smoke hog which is the
ventilation
precipitator and ours got like
backordered and we got delayed 4 months
just waiting for one piece of equipment
which we could not open our business
without.
>> Wasn't that the plot of an actual bear
episode? It was something with the
ventilator, right? I'm sure it was. The
Bear season two was perfect when they
were building out that restaurant and
the chaos as you're going through it.
Um,
>> and yeah, go ahead, Alex. That was you
mentioned earlier kind of like when
you're looking at a restaurant and the
type of uh so I mean the ideal situation
is what's called black iron where you're
essentially exhausting out through an
exhaust and you have an exhaust fan and
and you know the city's very specific
about those types of buildings where you
can do that versus you know in this
situation the type of we have a
precipitator that basically cleans the
exhaust air and is vented out onto the
street right so typically if you have
like open windows things like that
you're not allowed to have normal kind
of like black iron exhaust. But yeah,
during the pandemic, a lot of different
types of critical equipment were just
non-existent. And you know, even for
example, walk-in box. At some point, I
remember during the pandemic, people
were tearing down old restaurants and
selling the old walk-in box just, you
know, 15y old panels, you know, and just
like selling it because people couldn't
find them. And it was just a rat race to
try to find this equipment or or also
electric equipment, you know, breakers,
things like that were on back order from
China. And I know there's been some
episodes on some of those issues on odd
lots, but you know, for for restaurants
where, you know, time is money. You're
trying to, you know, build a team, get
out ahead of, you know, the rent and
things like that. And, you know, it was
just a nightmare trying to pull it
together.
[Music]
How big of a challenge is labor and how
skilled is pizza labor? Like, do they
still have to twirl the dough? Like, is
that a thing or is that just like for
show at some restaurants? Talk to us
about the labor component of the
business.
>> So, it depends on the the segment of
pizza. So like New York Slice and
Sicilian and things like that, the labor
bar is a little bit lower, but for us
it's still very high-end. Like we'll
take probably at least 30 candidates.
We'll trial probably 10 of them and then
one guy might stay 3 months and one guy
might stay two years. Who knows?
>> For woodfired and coal fired like like I
have a woodfired that's down in the West
Village. That is such an artisal product
that to have a guy that actually knows
what he's doing can take six months to
train and then three years to understand
and then another 5 years to really
understand. You know, like it takes a
lifetime and you're just constantly
learning.
>> I actually wanted to ask you about this,
but why did you decide to go electric
with this particular oven versus coal or
wood?
>> Great question. So, it was a mandate by
the building that we're in because we're
in a, you know, a high-rise, right? But
it also has the added benefit that the
current is more consistent because
you're drawing the power and you're
heating the product more consistently
than a flame, which might eb and flow in
terms of temperature. So, our oven is
more similar to like a Tesla than it is
to actually like an oven. It's got a lot
of electronics in it. And we saw that
firsthand when we literally tore it
apart on the street, the sidewalk,
disassembled it, moved it through the
door because it's a huge piece of
equipment, and then reassembled it
within the space. It was so impressive.
The pictures are incredible.
>> Just to z back up, let's say Tracy and I
wanted to open up a pizza restaurant.
How much money do we have to have? Do we
realistically both in terms of like
putting down money for rent, but then
the full like what kind of operation is
this to get into? If you're talking
about ours, you know, we did a,000
square feet. The biggest mistake all
restaurant tours make is they just don't
have enough working capital after they
open the doors.
>> So, I would say to be safe, you're
looking at minimum 400,000, but probably
in the 5 to 600K range just to give you
that extra cushion cuz, you know, I've
been working with my, you know, my
family's had restaurants in New York
since the 80s and I, you know, started
in ' 09. You would make your payback in
like 18 months. Now we're looking with
the way the expenses are, you know,
insurance is up 20 30% since precoid
labor, you're looking at a 3year time
horizon often. So, and it takes so long
sometimes for someone cuz we're not a
national, right? So, we're not getting
that automatic like press. So, just as a
mom and pop, you know, you often need
more time to get the marketing out
there. So, yeah, 500 to 600,000 seems
like right a good spot for like a,000
square feet. But, yeah.
>> Yeah. And this is in the QSR segment,
the quick serve restaurant. If it was
full service, you're looking at, you
know, 700 to a million. It gets up there
pretty pretty quickly.
>> Yeah. because I mean it's just more
involved like let's say in that space
you know obviously the equipment and
those types of needs the working capital
needs are more because the staffing
needs are more expensive but also just
the finishes like anything now these
days you know services are so expensive
you know whether it's electric plumbing
like all these different inputs that go
into building a restaurant are just that
much more expensive and you know I think
that's just kind of like the way it is
now post pandemic these types of
services are just very expensive so you
know for a
your cost of the buildout is that much
more expensive just because of that
reality.
>> How does distribution work for you guys?
Cuz I imagine this might be another big
capital investment. And it's something
that came up when we were speaking to
the baker earlier. He pointed out that
it's not just about making the bread.
You actually have to deliver it to your
customers. When I think about pizza, I
think about pizza boxes. I think about
pizza boxes coming directly to my door
uh usually around midnight or something
like that. How do you actually uh get
the pizza out to customers?
>> I've kind of been involved in a lot of
that, but yeah, it's like you just move
heaven and earth and you just need to
get it there anyway you can. So,
obviously best cases, you know, we're
really focusing locally. We, you know,
love all the office clientele in the
area and we've been doing a lot of like
quick deliveries, but you know, we're
looking at orders throughout the city
and like there's been days where we'll
rent a U-Haul and just fill it up with
pizza boxes and get it down there. Yeah,
>> I've brought in, you know, my personal
car. I'm originally from New Jersey, but
I had my personal car one day and we had
like a last minute like huge order. I'm
just driving through the city in my
personal car, you know. So, Subways, any
way you can get it. And yeah, it's just
one of those products where we have been
trying to focus locally cuz pizza, it
does lose its luster the further away
you get, right? Traveling it when it's
stuck in the boxes can be an issue, but
you know, we just make it work and
whatever it takes to get it there on
time. What are your capacity
constraints? Let's say I'm at the
office. Someone closes a big sale. I was
like, "This is great. Let's have a party
tonight. Could I call you up?" Like,
"How quickly could I get 30 pizzas from
you?"
>> 30 if if you give us like three hours,
we'll get it there. Yeah, for sure. I
mean, we've we've done that.
>> And what's the most number of pizzas you
can have cooking at one time? Like, and
inventory of pizzas that you have
already cooked. Like, talk to us through
Yeah.
>> Yeah. I mean, we have a pretty decent
throughput. So, you know, we've done 50
to 100 pie orders. you know,
>> and it's all about timing and moisture
control. You know, the way that we
design the dough, you know, it's very
efficient on the reheat is what we tend
to call. We're able to get that all out
at once. And we feed a lot of desks in
Midtown. Like, you know, shout out Jerry
from Namora by the way and Black Rockck
and all those guys like, you know, so
we're feeding the desk and you know,
once they order from us, it's game over.
They're weekly, right? So, we're used to
that kind of, you know, throughput and
it is a like Alex alluded to earlier,
you know, it's a functional part of our
business. We really rely on catering
and, you know, the offices to really
sustain us in this one very very hyper
local, you know, neighborhood. So,
speaking of hyper local, do you tailor
the menu for that particular location or
is pizza like a universal transportable
good that can work basically anywhere in
New York at least?
>> 100%. You definitely tailor. So, when I
designed the dough, I had a lot of
things in mind like this is a very
vertical area. So we limit the amount of
blocks we go because by the time you
take an elevator up and that guy comes
back, this is 30 minutes, you know, like
he's gone, right? So that's why as
owners, the collective three of us, you
could see us running around Midtown East
like in carts and cars and U-Hauls and
like we're all pitching in to kind of
make this all happen.
>> But what about in terms of the actual
menu, like the pizza flavors and design?
Yeah. I mean, yeah, we we avoid specific
items that don't hold up well in a box
or lose their heat. And, you know, it
limits like you don't want to do fish,
right? You never do you never see fish
on pizza, right? It's rare.
>> My dad always ordered anchovi pizza. It
was disgusting.
>> Yeah. It's usually the cured stuff, not
like, you know, you're not going to get
like sea bass on there.
>> Seabbass ceviche pizza.
>> Yeah.
>> Someone will do that. You know, they
will.
>> I'm sure they will. Let's, we talked
about this sort of upfront capital cost.
Let's try to work the math in the other
direction. Like I buy a slice of pizza
or I buy 10 slices of pizza. How much of
what I'm paying for is the labor that
went into it. How much is it the raw
ingredient? And how much is it your
upfront capital outlay and the profit
you need to make on your risk? Like talk
to me about like how you're getting paid
back for all these things. What's the
math there?
>> So historically it's been 30 30 3010,
right? Okay. So 30 fixed costs, 30
labor, 30 food costs, and then 10%
profit, right? That's like normal for
New York. If you're outside of New York,
your profit gets a little bit higher,
but you're also not doing as much
volume. So you can get like,
>> you know, I mean, Shake Shack's numbers,
if if you look at like 17% profit margin
for them. You know, they're bigger, they
can extract more value out of things,
get better pricing. But in New York
City, it's a little more cutthroat and
you might even get 5% profit margins or
no percent profit at all and you go out
of business, right?
>> Are there items on a pizza restaurant
menu or options that are particularly
high margin? Like, you know, there's
some X on this, but you really make your
money on Y.
>> Oh, yeah. You could have what's called
loss leaders, right? Like you have
things that attract you to the place
like you know stakes have a 50% margin,
right? And when I said the 30 3010, by
the way, it's changed in the last
decade. Now your labor cost is 45%.
You know, your food costs are where
you're trying to save a little bit more
money by getting creative with the menu
items. And then your fixed cost, you
know, you're trying to limit those as
well. But the variables have been
through the roof, right? Like the
insurance has gone crazy.
>> Yeah. And just in terms of Yeah. The one
thing that does attract most people to
pizza restaurants is in general, your
food cost is pretty good. Like you'll
get if you're like really humming you'll
you'll get it like close to 20% which is
you know most restaurants like our
Oxford Cafe and similar QSRS like that
you're at the 30 to 35. So your food
cost is the great component. It's now in
New York 10% was the rule of thumb on
rent. Everyone is now you know in the 15
to 17% range. So there's all these
different changes and you know what you
knew about you know your cost structures
and you're just searching for new sales
any way you can and you know you're
trying to keep the walk-ins growing but
yeah it's just managing it there's so
many different expenses to manage but
yeah there's just been a huge change
since co
>> well this is something that keeps coming
up increased costs in the restaurant
business what levers do you have to pull
what levers are available to you to try
to keep those costs down because it
seems like you You need to hire people.
Presumably, you need to hire them at a
competitive rate. You have a, you know,
a premium pizza product, so you don't
want to sacrifice quality. Insurance,
I'm guessing, is not that negotiable.
Like, what can you do?
>> It's just grow, grow, grow. You know,
that's all all you can do. I mean,
recently, I've I've taken on from all my
businesses cold calling. You know, I've
been looking at, you know, I I'll look
at directories of buildings. I'm finding
the company names, finding the phone
numbers, and I'm just calling companies.
And it's honestly, I've we've already
netted like 10 to 15 new catering
orders. So, you just have to keep
growing. That's just that's just what it
is. Cuz yeah, in terms of food costs,
that's a good question. You also need to
keep your purveyors honest. You need to
have a book of other purveyors to
constantly check pricing cuz yeah, we
even, you know, I've been in our
restaurants, the Oxford Cafe and the
Mill. I mean, we had purveyors that had
been serving us for 20 years and we kind
of stopped checking and all of a sudden
you realize even even people who are
loyal to you are jacking up little
prices here and there. So, you need to
constantly be checking your invoices and
doing your due diligence cuz it's on you
to make sure nothing slides by you.
>> The other thing I'd add, one of the
challenges on sort of the the vendors
and purveyor side is that you've also
seen a lot of concentration occur over
the last like 10 to 20 years. So it so
it's also a challenge to kind of be able
to kind of price and and check with
different suppliers and things like
that. And one of the interesting things
that happened with the pandemic though
is that because everything became so
expensive, you did start seeing a lot of
jobbers basically people kind of pulling
up in the back of the truck, you know,
kind of bringing different products and
things like that and often able to kind
of undercut the pricing a little bit.
But in general the especially on the
supply side there is a lot of
concentration there economically because
just the nature of the business now and
and the regulations and things like that
there's just a lot of economic pressure
that results in this concentration.
>> Do you use a lot of third-party services
or like outsource certain things to
middlemen because this again has come up
in a previous conversation the idea that
you're spending more on just the middle
guy to get things done.
>> Okay. So yeah, in terms of yeah,
obviously the big one I know is the all
the third party delivery services. You
know, that's one of those you have to
make them work for you. Unfortunately,
in this past week, they had capped third
party fees at 5% after the pandemic to
help out restaurants, but starting
August 1st, those rates are coming back
up to 20%. So you'll be at 20% on that,
4% on the transaction fee, and then if
you're using the third party services,
Caviar, GrubHub, etc. for deliveries,
they charge another 10 to 15%.
>> Wow.
>> So I look at the prices I charge on my
restaurants on my third party sites.
We're 15% higher than our in-house
pricing often
>> because you need it to manage that
expense. But I can't even imagine where
it's going to go again August 1st cuz
people's prices are already crazy. And
yeah, you need to make it work. And with
the pizzeria, we always felt we at least
take our deliveries ourself. We find,
you know, with pizza, you want like
really good control of that. Someone who
doesn't work at your restaurant, they're
just looking at that as a tip for
themselves. So, you want to make sure
your pizza's being delivered correctly.
But yeah, that that's one of the hardest
costs to manage cuz with deliveries, you
obviously paper plastic goods, you know,
everything that's going out, the cost
just go crazy. And yeah, now if they're
going to be charging 15% more again, you
know, it really adds up. So that's one
thing we've been discussing actually
this whole week is how how much are we
going to have to increase prices to like
deal with that you know that shock again
>> to just add to what Evan saying. So, in
recent years, like the last 2 years or
so, venture capital has really stopped
subsidizing these third party, you know,
websites and they're no longer offering
these heavy discounts and like they
basically bought the market, right? They
offered this free, you know, you can get
it instantaneous lunch and then now
we're actually going to rack up prices
and like, you know, Uber specifically,
they did this with the taxis. They put
everybody out of business and then once
they own the market, they're like, "All
right, you know what? We're going to
take our actual cut."
>> Yeah. I mean, they they are like really
parasitic uh entities. I I they've just
disrupted Sure.
It sounds like you've thought about this
before. I mean I mean they've really
really disrupted the food industry and
one of the elements that I feel like you
know future historians when they're
looking back on this time and really
thinking about kind of the American and
you know what's like the the defining
aspect of the of the American and it's
like you know they want convenience and
these companies are trying to fulfill
that but operating in such a parasitic
manner that they just really really harm
put themselves in between you and your
customer you know the restaurant, their
customer, and just basically absorb all
the uh the upside there.
>> And in the process, they're basically
just decimating, you know, this
industry. And
>> you're also seeing in the way they're
responding where, you know, now they're
trying to go fully vertical, right?
They're like opening up these ghost
kitchens where they have all these weird
brands and
>> the stupidest restaurant name.
>> Yeah. I mean, just like all the Yeah.
It's just like the most ridiculous
restaurant names and they're attempting
to cultivate this like faux, you know,
ital like local Italian deli and and
it's just ridiculous. And
>> but you know, because they have so much
capital behind them, they're able to
kind of
>> manage through these concentrated apps
like the access, you know, they're able
to do that. I don't know how successful
they'll be, but it's really harmful.
They're asocial. They're really hurting
kind of third spaces and where people
used to come together. And it's very
odd.
[Music]
So in light of all of these gigantic
companies parasitically extracting value
and disrupting community, how are we
feeling about socialism these days?
which I only ask obviously because we're
in, you know, we uh we may have a
socialist mayor in a few months.
>> Yeah. I mean, nominally socialist. I
feel like um
>> Well, it's interesting because I imagine
you guys love making money and you're
entrepreneurs. On the other hand, part
of his campaign
>> was actually spotlighting small business
and bodeas and deli, etc. So, I'm
curious how you're thinking about like
>> Wait, wait, wait. Are you worried
there's going to be cityowned?
Well, you know, Zoram Mani ran an
incredible campaign, so energetic. And
>> the one thing we always talk about is
that everybody has a point, right? You
know, cost living issues are are real.
It's it's hard and daily life has become
much more of a grind than it was before
the pandemic, right? So, you know, I
think he was addressing, you know, real
concerns from people and, you know,
>> Yeah. but what are you worried about?
You know the one thing I'll you know we
were talking about this on the way over
you know if you had not visited New York
in two years and you know you came back
two years later now you know the first
thing you would say is the city's a lot
cleaner and is actually more fun seems
more functional and you know there's a
lot less crime and kind of disorder.
>> Do you notice it? Because I was going to
say I know the stats are good but I
can't tell like how much am I being
influenced by the fact that I read the
news and the stats are very good these
days but you absolutely notice it.
>> I I I think absolutely. I mean, do you
>> someone who like cuz we're I'm commuting
all day between the restaurants. I mean,
from like 2020 to today, it's like I go
on the subway seven, eight times a day,
walk around the streets, like it is very
noticeable. I know obviously there's a
lot of like there was a lot of trashing
New York, you know, during COVID and the
election cycles and all that, but yeah,
it's definitely not at that level that
it was, but I do understand, yeah, when
you can pay for eggs or milk and stuff
like that, I do understand why people
are going in that direction, but it also
the policies need to be sensible cuz we
already have a crazy budget in the city
and we, you know, if you keep adding
more and more debt, you know, I just
don't see how you can pay for all these
things he's saying
>> without hurting us down the road, right?
>> The overregulation is the biggest the
biggest problem for restaurants moving
forward.
>> And I did see, you know, he had he had
great campaign points. There was this
really stunning video on how he wanted
to appoint a small business ZAR, which I
thought would really eloquently describe
like the the plight that the mom and pop
is currently facing, right? Like if
you're Chipotle, you got like 10 guys
that can handle regulation and they can
just deal with all that stuff. But like
me, Evan, and Alex, we're like just
literally trying to just get you food,
you know?
>> Yeah. I I think the other thing I would
say is like, you know, if if you look at
his campaign proposals, let's say
housing and things like that,
>> you know, it's very much kind of trying
to manage like a lot of existing
programs that you know, from the Adams
administration, city of Yes. and
different like regulatory making it
easier to permitting things like that.
>> It's not like, you know, he's proposing
building a million housing units via
Nicha. Do do you know what I mean? Like
that's why I find like a lot of the
conversation about him to be very
strange because
>> hyperbolic.
>> Yeah. It's hyperbolic, but also his
proposals really aren't, you know, you
call him a socialist and he calls
himself a socialist, but his proposals
are are much more kind of like in line
with what's kind of the progressive
neoliberal paradigm that we've had over
the last six years. You know, for
example, like, you know, he talks about
rent control and things like that. You
know, a lot of that was enacted via
Cuomo in 2019, right?
There's never been a real honest debate.
Have those reforms that were enacted
2019, have they worked? And clearly, you
know, based on this campaign, they
haven't. So, what works, what doesn't
work, you know, and I I also don't think
I don't see a lot of foreign journalists
coming to New York and saying, "Wow,
this regulatory regime is something we
need to we need to bring this to, you
know, Tokyo. We need to bring this
Vienna." Yeah. Read Vienna. Like, you
know, nobody says that. No, you know, so
that's kind of
>> I feel like sometimes we're not honest
and you know, often times also like the
debate about Evan mentioned the city
budgets like $120 billion. It's massive,
right? You know, so when somebody talks
about austerity budgets, it always rings
hollow to me because, you know, you
you're spending a lot of money. It's
nearly $40,000 per student for the NYC
DOE, but it's not really delivering
results. So what does that mean? Like is
it more we're not spending enough? Is
it, you know, we're not effective in
governance? Like I think those are the
more interesting questions that
sometimes, you know, people don't want
to discuss because those are hard
questions.
>> Pizza and politics. I like this
combination.
>> Be a good uh someone's got to be doing
that already. But if not, it could be a
recurring theme for us.
>> Well, talk a little bit more about the
regulatory choke points. It's like give
us a sense cuz if I think about
regulation of New York restaurants like
okay when you're opening I'm sure there
are a lot of hoops to jump through but
then after that the only thing I can
really think of is the uh the health
letter that goes up on the window and
frankly like I see a lot of nonas around
so it seems in my mind like maybe this
isn't a big deal if you can continue to
operate without getting an A. I mean the
one I want to bring up is earlier
talking about why we went electric.
>> If you try to get a new gas service into
a restaurant, your restaurant may never
wake up. I mean wake up may never open.
>> With the Coned process just for gas, it
is actually funny story. I currently in
my apartment our gas line cracked in
January and we might not get it back to
the following January or February. So
that's just one where if you're trying
to open up a restaurant, like you might
just be sitting there calling Connet
every day just begging for them to let
your restaurant operate so you can make
your investment back. So that's just
one. But yeah, there's just a lot of
constant, you know, at one point they
put a regulation for you can't keep your
doors open so air conditioning and flow
out. You know, obviously the paper straw
thing was a big one. So there's constant
little annoyances that they just try to
put into your business and it's like
just
>> why are people straws still a thing?
Trump won. I thought like wait I thought
why did we get rid of that for real like
how are they I still get them from time
to time like who's asking for this
>> I couldn't agree more it's just like
it's just these little things that we
try to constantly do and it's just a
headache for us like you know with the
garbage it's like obviously I'm very
happy Mayor Adams you know tackled
that's been a huge issue for this city
>> do you perceive uh progress on that like
when you look at the trash and also the
rat situation in New York which he touts
his war on rats a lot do you perceive
are you able to see progress claims to
be a single issue voter on rats. I'm not
sure it's true.
>> Pizza rats.
>> No. Do you notice the kind of stuff?
>> I mean, I think it's just very good to
just containerize garbage, you know,
especially So, I was just in Europe and
Portugal and they have these beautiful
garbage cans where they it's a shoot
underground, then they come and get it.
Like, I would love to just stop seeing
garbage bags everywhere, you know, and
it's, you know, we just need to clean up
the streets a little bit, right? So,
it's good.
>> Yeah. I also want to add to that because
um when COVID happened, they basically
opened up the regulation for every
three-letter agency. So, while you're
seeing a lot more of the grade pending
signs from the health department, I
mean, I'm more concerned about the fire
department and the department of
transportation because the way that they
tackled the outdoor dining has been
ridiculous. There's a hundred new steps
to doing outdoor dining whereas I used
to just have to fill out a form, send in
a check and it get renewed every year.
Now I have 11 pending tickets from the
Department of Transportation for various
reasons.
>> That's a shame. I'm a big fan of outdoor
dining and I wish there was more of it
in New York despite the rat problem.
Jerry, in terms of additional pressures
on the business, there's another one we
should probably talk about. Again,
situation is kind of in flux. We're
recording this on July 8th, but tariffs,
right? I assume as a pizza place, maybe
you're importing uh some tomatoes from
Italy or I don't know, fancy flour from
France, which I know is a thing. Is that
expected to impact your business at all?
>> One area where it definitely has
impacted is just paper and plastic. Um,
a lot of paper and plastic materials
that go into kind of branding and things
like that do come from abroad. It's just
become more expensive in the US to
produce those types of things. So, you
know, you're importing a lot of
different products. The bulls that you
see at at different spots come from, you
know, Vietnam or China or some other
areas and uh, you know, the pulp bulls.
And so, that's one area where clearly,
you know, for a lot of restaurants, they
are impacted. You know, obviously
there's, you know, it's been kind of a
ridiculous couple of months with the the
back and forth, but that's definitely an
area where I think a lot of restaurant
operators are concerned and will
actually ultimately be impacted by it.
>> So, it it is a global supply chain and
like here's an example, right? Like what
do you associate the food product of
Switzerland to be?
>> Cheese.
>> Cheese. Okay. Chocolate. How many miles
you think is the local cocoa bean from
Switzerland?
>> A lot.
>> A lot. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Like 1,200 miles.
>> But cheese is local.
>> Cheese is local. Yeah.
>> How would you assess the sort of current
cyclical state of the New York City
economy? People, I don't think have like
ever been more divided and confused
about just the trajectory of whether
we're talking about the national economy
or anything else. You could have people
pointing to signs like, "Look, things
are booming right now." And other people
will have very compelling arguments like
things are slowing down, Fed's got to
cut and stuff. Like right now, July 8th,
how are things feeling? I mean I I could
start. I know we all have opinions on
it. I mean just back to why we started
this business. We always believed New
York would come back. You know obviously
we took a huge risk uh in the middle of
co and you know right now we are seeing
it's always good and bad signs right.
Obviously we just came out of the big
holiday cycle you know between Memorial
Day Junth and 4th of July and you know
we are seeing more catering which is
great. Obviously in an area like Midtown
East it's very nice to see the foot
traffic you know Monday through Thursday
back again. So that's, you know, we're
feeling very optimistic entering this.
>> Fridays are gone for good, huh?
>> That, so that was one thing we didn't
bring up earlier. You know, one of the
big issues trying to manage your
expenses is that Friday, at least in New
York, you know, I don't know about other
cities or in the suburbs, but
>> losing that Friday, you know, that
Friday we're, you know, you're
>> people probably don't eat more lunch on
Monday through Thursday to compensate
for the fact that they're not ordering
up.
>> Exactly. Like when you're doing your
basic, you know, modeling for your
restaurant, losing one whole week day a
week, right? It adds up. But I will say
we are feeling way better entering this
fall than the previous years. You know,
just we've had a couple months where
it's like, wow, this is, you know, we
had two months that were up 25% at Zenos
from last year, which is fantastic. So,
feeling good on that end, but you know,
we're always on edge, right? It's like
we don't know what's going to happen
with certain expenses and we're going to
keep pushing. But, yeah.
>> So, yeah, to speak to that, the wealth
effect, right? people can avoid coming
into to Manhattan on Friday, but also
during the summer when you have a Labor
Day, Memorial Day, you know, the three
big holidays, they're gone the week
before and the week after. So, you're
essentially New York City is turning
into a little bit of a ghost town.
>> Well, because they're really rich these
days cuz the stock market, so they're
taking longer vacations around holidays.
Is that what you're saying?
>> It's It's all the points.
>> They're buying pizza in the Hamptons.
>> Exactly.
>> That these are becoming longer holidays
than they used to.
>> That's really interesting.
>> You can see it in the sales. Wow.
>> Yeah. I think I I think that's kind of
part of the problem where before the
pandemic, a lot of these being in the
restaurant industry, it was very
predictable. You kind of had like a
sense of where each week would be and
how to manage, you know, that was just
kind of like second nature. And now with
kind of remote work and, you know, how
people approach work as well. You know,
it's it's a much bigger challenge to
kind of manage the business and
predicting and you know, being able to
kind of steady sales on the city as a
whole. Well, it's it's kind of
interesting like Midtown East, the Plaza
District, as Manhattan was moving
upwards and north, you know, what made
that area that area was the
transportation network, right? It's like
a nexus of transportation. You have
Grand Central, all the subway lines
crossing there, and it's a real crossing
of the whole tri-state area. East Side
Access obviously was the big project
that brought LIRR into Grand Central.
Hopefully, they figure out how to
actually like properly utilize that.
But, you know, and that's kind of why
we're bullish longterm on that specific
part of the city. It's, you know, it
draws people from all over the region
and ultimately that's what's going to
allow it to thrive again and, you know,
replicate kind of the uh where it was
pre- pandemic.
>> If you were opening Zenos again or if
you could go back in time and and do it
over, is there anything you'd do
differently?
>> Well, that's a that's a heavy one. Yeah.
I mean back to your yeah the question
earlier it's like when you're picking
the location you know you're looking for
office clients tourists locals and you
know you're trying to balance all those
things obviously and then against the
cost of the rent we obviously found a
you know area where did not have a lot
of competition we felt was going to give
us a chance to
>> and you just found that by typing pizza
in Google maps and zooming out looking
for lack of red dots that's crazy when
you're looking you need to yeah you need
to check what's what's around you and we
like the space. It, you know, obviously
was a great space over there and we knew
the area, but for example, one thing
we've lost in this area is tourists
because uh four or five of like the big
hotels in the area have shut down since
co
>> so obviously looking back you can't
predict that and I do think if we had
another chance it's like I mean we love
this space but like maybe do you need to
like go find an area that's a little bit
more touristy but like how how can you
predict that? And then the one thing we
were discussing which is interesting is
obviously pizza and bars usually go
together, right? But you are seeing
people are drinking less now. So are
those areas not as good as you know they
used to be? I don't know.
>> Evan, Alex, and James, that was
fantastic. That was the conversation I
hope to have. I I didn't even know we
were going to get pizza out of it, but
that was a lot of fun. We learned a lot.
And uh thank you all so much for coming
on Outlaws.
>> Thank you. Thanks for having us. Great.
>> Thanks for having us.
>> Shout out Chris Hatch, by the way. Oh
yeah, Chris Hatch, by the way, who uh
we've had on the podcast a couple of
times. He introduced me to James and
then I also met Alex by going to the
Oxford Cafe. So, all coming together
here. Thank you guys so much.
>> Thank you.
>> Thanks so much.
[Music]
Tracy, I actually my stomach does not
feel that bad. I did not know that about
like oh you ferment for a long time and
then eat the gluten and then you don't
feel as heavy. I didn't know I didn't
know anything about that.
>> I didn't know that either. Although I
have to confess the whole lunchtime
heaviness thing is I have never had that
problem. I never understood it.
>> Do you think I have a gluten I'd be so
embarrassed like I I don't want to I
don't want to judge people who like I've
always like what if I'm one of those
gluten people.
>> Well,
>> oh I have a gluten.
>> Well, maybe you'll feel better if you
actually take it into account. But that
was really
>> fine. I have empathy now upon realizing
that I'm one of those gluten people.
>> All right. Well, okay. So, we talked
about pizza and politics,
>> Sicilian with a side of socialism.
>> Yeah.
>> Marinara and the macroeconomy.
>> Were you writing all these down?
>> Yes, I was actually.
>> I love your fidiousness about dropping
puns and alliteration whenever you get
whenever you get an whenever you get a
opportunity. But no, I did think that
was uh really fun. And I like
entrepreneurs. They're optimistic. They
have to be, don't they?
>> That's right. I am thinking about like a
couple themes that keep coming across in
these couple of episodes we've done on
the sort of restaurant or wholesale food
business. Yeah. And that's the idea of a
lot of the cost increases coming from
that sort of middle layer of third-party
services. Whether it's because you have
to outsource something like distribution
or it's because you have to use
something like an app, a food delivery
app that charges an enormous amount of
money to both the customer and the
restaurant apparently. I feel like I
need to impress this on people who are
not in New York. The food app charges in
New York. By the way, I never get I
actually start I'm real oldfashioned. I
walk to the store and pick up my food
after ordering it online.
>> That's Lindy.
>> Yeah,
>> it is Lindy. Yeah. No, it's insane. It's
It's completely insane.
>> All right. Well, we could probably talk
about pizza for a long time.
>> But we have more pizza in the control
room right now. So, rather than
continuing to talk about it, I want
another slice.
>> All right. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You can
follow me at Tracee Alaway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stallwork. Go check out their
restaurants. Um, Alex and Evan and
James. They all have uh, Xenos. And
also, I swear I I kind of want to do the
Oxford Cafe on I guess 60th Street is
the best chopped salad in the We could
at one point I wanted to do an episode
on their chopped salad because it's it's
its own great logistic story. So, go
check out the Oxford Cafe if you're in
the area. Follow James Shields on
Twitter, James A. Shields. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Armen. Dash Bennett at Dashbot and
Kalebrooks at Kalebrooks. For more
OddLots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlots
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes and you can chat about
all of these topics 24/7 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlotss.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when we talk about the business of
carbs, then please leave us a positive
review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Yeah.
Heat.
[Music]